
Analysis Packages
*****************

As explained in *Analysis Packages*, analysis packages are structured
Python classes that describe how Cuckoo's analyzer component should
conduct the analysis procedure for a given file inside the guest
environment.

As you already know, you can create your own packages and add them
along with the default ones. Designing new packages is very easy and
requires just a minimal understanding of programming and of the Python
language.


Getting started
===============

As an example we'll take a look at the default package for analyzing
generic Windows executables (located at
*analyzer/windows/packages/exe.py*):

      from lib.common.abstracts import Package
      from lib.api.process import Process
      from lib.common.exceptions import CuckooPackageError

      class Exe(Package):
          """EXE analysis package."""

          def start(self, path):
              free = self.options.get("free", False)
              args = self.options.get("arguments", None)
              dll = self.options.get("dll", None)
              suspended = True
              if free:
                  suspended = False

              p = Process()
              if not p.execute(path=path, args=args, suspended=suspended):
                  raise CuckooPackageError("Unable to execute initial process, "
                                           "analysis aborted")

              if not free and suspended:
                  p.inject(dll)
                  p.resume()
                  p.close()
                  return p.pid
              else:
                  return None

          def check(self):
              return True

          def finish(self):
              if self.options.get("procmemdump", False):
                  for pid in self.pids:
                      p = Process(pid=pid)
                      p.dump_memory()

              return True

Let's walk through the code:
   * Line **1**: import the base "Package" class, it's needed to
     define our analysis package class.

   * Line **2**: import the "Process" API class, which is used to
     create and manipulate Windows processes.

   * Line **3**: import the "CuckooPackageError" exception, which is
     used to notify issues with the execution of the package to the
     analyzer.

   * Line **5**: define the main class, inheriting "Package".

   * Line **8**: define the "start()" function, which takes as
     argument the path to the file to execute.

   * Line **9**: acquire the "free" option, which is used to define
     whether the process should be monitored or not.

   * Line **10**: acquire the "arguments" option, which is passed to
     the creation of the initial process.

   * Line **16**: initialize a "Process" instance.

   * Line **17** and **18**: try to execute the malware, if it fails
     it aborts the execution and notify the analyzer.

   * Line **21**: check if the process should be monitored.

   * Line **22**: inject the process with our DLL.

   * Line **23**: resume the process from the suspended state.

   * Line **25**: return the PID of the newly created process to the
     analyzer.

   * Line **29**: define the "check()" function.

   * Line **32**: define the "finish()" function.

   * Line **33**: check if the "procmemdump" option was enabled.

   * Line **34**: loop through the currently monitored processes.

   * Line **35**: open a "Process" instance.

   * Line **36**: take a dump of the process memory.


"start()"
---------

In this function you have to place all the initialization operations
you want to run. This might include running the malware process,
launching additional applications, taking memory snapshots and more.


"check()"
---------

This function is executed by Cuckoo every second while the malware is
running. You can use this function to perform any kind of recurrent
operation.

For example if in your analysis you are looking for just one specific
indicator to be created (e.g. a file) you could place your condition
in this function and if it returns "False", the analysis will
terminate straight away.

Think of it as "should the analysis continue or not?".

For example:

   def check(self):
       if os.path.exists("C:\\config.bin"):
           return False
       else:
           return True

This "check()" function will cause Cuckoo to immediately terminate the
analysis whenever *C:config.bin* is created.


"finish()"
----------

This function is simply called by Cuckoo before terminating the
analysis and powering off the machine. By default, this function
contains an optional feature to dump the process memory of all the
monitored processes.


Options
=======

Every package have automatically access to a dictionary containing all
user-specified options (see *Submit an Analysis*).

Such options are made available in the attribute "self.options". For
example let's assume that the user specified the following string at
submission:

   foo=1,bar=2

The analysis package selected will have access to these values:

   from lib.common.abstracts import Package

   class Example(Package):

       def start(self, path):
           foo = self.options["foo"]
           bar = self.options["bar"]

       def check():
           return True

       def finish():
           return True

These options can be used for anything you might need to configure
inside your package.


Process API
===========

The "Process" class provides access to different process-related
features and functions. You can import it in your analysis packages
with:

   from lib.api.process import Process

You then initialize an instance with:

   p = Process()

In case you want to open an existing process instead of creating a new
one, you can specify multiple arguments:

   * "pid": PID of the process you want to operate on.

   * "h_process": handle of a process you want to operate on.

   * "thread_id": thread ID of a process you want to operate on.

   * "h_thread": handle of the thread of a process you want to
     operate on.

This class implements several methods that you can use in your own
scripts.


Methods
-------

Process.open()

   Opens an handle to a running process. Returns "True" or "False" in
   case of success or failure of the operation.

   Return type:
      boolean

   Example Usage:

      p = Process(pid=1234)
      p.open()
      handle = p.h_process

Process.exit_code()

   Returns the exit code of the opened process. If it wasn't already
   done before, "exit_code()" will perform a call to "open()" to
   acquire an handle to the process.

   Return type:
      ulong

   Example Usage:

      p = Process(pid=1234)
      code = p.exit_code()

Process.is_alive()

   Calls "exit_code()" and verify if the returned code is
   "STILL_ACTIVE", meaning that the given process is still running.
   Returns "True" or "False".

   Return type:
      boolean

   Example Usage:

      p = Process(pid=1234)
      if p.is_alive():
          print("Still running!")

Process.get_parent_pid()

   Returns the PID of the parent process of the opened process. If it
   wasn't already done before, "get_parent_pid()" will perform a call
   to "open()" to acquire an handle to the process.

   Return type:
      int

   Example Usage:

      p = Process(pid=1234)
      ppid = p.get_parent_pid()

Process.execute(path[, args=None[, suspended=False]])

   Executes the file at the specified path. Returns "True" or "False"
   in case of success or failure of the operation.

   Parameters:
      * **path** (*string*) -- path to the file to execute

      * **args** (*string*) -- arguments to pass to the process
        command line

      * **suspended** (*boolean*) -- enable or disable suspended
        mode flag at process creation

   Return type:
      boolean

   Example Usage:

      p = Process()
      p.execute(path="C:\\WINDOWS\\system32\\calc.exe", args="Something", suspended=True)

Process.resume()

   Resumes the opened process from a suspended state. Returns "True"
   or "False" in case of success or failure of the operation.

   Return type:
      boolean

   Example Usage:

      p = Process()
      p.execute(path="C:\\WINDOWS\\system32\\calc.exe", args="Something", suspended=True)
      p.resume()

Process.terminate()

   Terminates the opened process. Returns "True" or "False" in case of
   success or failure of the operaton.

   Return type:
      boolean

   Example Usage:

      p = Process(pid=1234)
      if p.terminate():
          print("Process terminated!")
      else:
          print("Could not terminate the process!")

Process.inject([dll[, apc=False]])

   Injects a DLL (by default "dll/cuckoomon.dll") into the opened
   process. Returns "True" or "False" in case of success or failure of
   the operation.

   Parameters:
      * **dll** (*string*) -- path to the DLL to inject into the
        process

      * **apc** (*boolean*) -- enable to use "QueueUserAPC()"
        injection istead of "CreateRemoteThread()", beware that if the
        process is in suspended mode, Cuckoo will always use
        "QueueUserAPC()"

   Return type:
      boolean

   Example Usage:

      p = Process()
      p.execute(path="C:\\WINDOWS\\system32\\calc.exe", args="Something", suspended=True)
      p.inject()
      p.resume()

Process.dump_memory()

   Takes a snapshot of the given process' memory space. Returns "True"
   or "False" in case of success or failure of the operation.

   Return type:
      boolean

   Example Usage:

      p = Process(pid=1234)
      p.dump_memory()
